Article - How to create an ESP-IDF component (#335)
espressif/developer-portal: content/blog/2024/11/how-to-create-an-esp-idf-component/index.md

### The Board: ESP32-C3-DevKit-RUST-1

This sensor can be found on the [ESP32-C3-DevKit-RUST-1](https://github.com/esp-rs/esp-rust-board/tree/v1.2) and this is the board that will be used to create the component.

The **ESP32-C3-DevKit-RUST-1** development board has 2 sensors connected to the I2C peripheral on the following GPIOs:

| Signal     | GPIO        |
|------------|-------------|
| SDA        | GPIO10      |
| SCL        | GPIO8       |

All the project files for this board are available on the GitHub.

{{< github repo="esp-rs/esp-rust-board" >}}

### Creating the component

Before creating the component, we will need to create a new project that the component will be part of. If you have already the project, you can skip this step and jump to the component creation.

The component can be created manually or you can use the `idf.py` tool to create all the basic skeleton. We recommend to create the new component by the tool provided by Espressif.

To create the component, we will go through some steps:

1. Create a new project.
2. Create the new component inside the project.

> 3. Write the driver code for the selected sensor.

Author: I've added more context, but we will create a sensor driver to illustrate how to make the component.

> 3. Write the driver code for the selected sensor.

Reviewer: I understand that, we just need to add a transition from the component to the driver somewhere to build a logical connection.

> 3. Write the driver code for the selected sensor.

Reviewer 2: I think a sentence introducing the sensor above can be rewritten as `For this new component, the sensor will be the` -> `This new component will be a driver for the sensor`

        err = shtc3_get_id(shtc3_handle, sensor_id);
        ESP_LOGI(TAG, "Sensor ID: 0x%02x%02x", sensor_id[0], sensor_id[1]);

        if(err == ESP_OK) {
            ESP_LOGI(TAG, "SHTC3 ID read successfully");
            xTaskCreate(shtc3_read_task, "shtc3_read_task", 4096, NULL, 5, NULL);
        } else {
            ESP_LOGE(TAG, "Failed to read SHTC3 ID");
        }

    } else {
        ESP_LOGE(TAG, "SHTC3 sensor not found");
        shtc3_device_delete(shtc3_handle);
    }
```

Task to read the sensor.

```c
void shtc3_read_task(void *pvParameters)
{
    float temperature, humidity;
    esp_err_t err = ESP_OK;
    shtc3_register_rw_t reg = SHTC3_REG_T_CSE_NM;

    while (1) {
        err = shtc3_get_th(shtc3_handle, reg, &temperature, &humidity);
        if(err != ESP_OK) {
            ESP_LOGE(TAG, "Failed to read data from SHTC3 sensor");
        } else {
            ESP_LOGI(TAG, "Temperature: %.2f C, Humidity: %.2f %%", temperature, humidity);
        }
        vTaskDelay(1000 / portTICK_PERIOD_MS);
    }
}
```

On this task, the sensor will be woken up, the readout will be read and processed, and then the sensor will return to sleep mode.

> #### Creating Kconfig (optional)

Reviewer: Do I understand it correctly that this config helps add options to `idf.py menuconfig`? If yes, suggest making it clearer for those not yet very comfortable with using ESP-IDF.

        config SHTC3_I2C_SCL
            int "I2C SCL pin"
            default 18
            range 0 55
            help
                Set the I2C SCL pin for the clock signal.

        config SHTC3_I2C_CLK_SPEED_HZ
            int "I2C clock speed (Hz)"
            default 100000
            range 10000 400000
            help
                Set the I2C clock speed in Hz.
    endmenu
  
endmenu
```

The `Kconfig` file should be placed on the component root directory. To set the values, you can use the command:

```bash
idf.py menuconfig
```

Having a component with a clear documentation and at least one example, can make your component frustration free. Developers enjoy when it just works!

### Running the application

To run the application, run the command to `flash` and `monitor` using the `idf.py`. The application will print the temperature and humidity.

{{< asciinema
  key="component_shtc3"
  idleTimeLimit="2"
  speed="1.5"
  poster="npt:0:09"
>}}

## Conclusion

Writing a new component is highly recommended for improving the project architecture. This is a very powerful approach and can be used for many different types of component, not only for drivers.

> 

Reviewer: Suggest that you also quickly recap what has been covered in this article.

For this new component, the sensor will be the [Sensirion SHTC3](https://sensirion.com/products/catalog/SHTC3). This is a I2C temperature and humidity sensor with a typical accuracy of ±2 %RH and ±0.2 °C. To know more about the specifications, please visit the official [product page](https://sensirion.com/products/catalog/SHTC3).

If you don't have this sensor, you can change to any other I2C device. All the information you might need for the new sensor should be provided by the manufacturer, including the device address, registers, etc.

### The Board: ESP32-C3-DevKit-RUST-1

We chose the sensor SHTC3, because it can be found on the [ESP32-C3-DevKit-RUST-1](https://github.com/esp-rs/esp-rust-board/tree/v1.2) development board. That is why, this is the board that we will use for developing the component.

The **ESP32-C3-DevKit-RUST-1** development board has 2 sensors connected to the I2C peripheral on the following GPIOs:

| Signal     | GPIO        |
|------------|-------------|
| SDA        | GPIO10      |
| SCL        | GPIO8       |

All the project files for this board are available on GitHub.

{{< github repo="esp-rs/esp-rust-board" >}}

### Creating the component

> Before creating the component, we will need to create a new project that the component will be part of. If you have already the project, you can skip this step and jump to the component creation.

Reviewer 2: It's not always the case, and we can have standalone components outside a project. I would suggest rephrasing, saying that in this tutorial we are going to create a component inside the project.

Author: This is outdated. Please check the new sentence:

`To create a new component, we will use a project as the starting point. This project will be used to develop and test the component. However, you can also create the component as a stand-alone without using a project.`

To create the component, we will go through some steps:

1. Create a new project.
2. Create the new component inside the project.
3. Write the driver code for the selected sensor.

> We assume that you already have the ESP-IDF version 5.2 or higher installed on your system.

#### Additional content from DevCon23

On the Espressif DevCon23, Ivan Grokhotkov, gave a talk titled: Developing, Publishing, and Maintaining Components for ESP-IDF. You can watch this talk as an additional material for your studies.

{{< youtube D86gQ4knUnc >}}

The Component Manager [documentation](https://docs.espressif.com/projects/idf-component-manager/en/latest/) is very comprehensive and you will find all the information you need there, including the [simple component](https://docs.espressif.com/projects/idf-component-manager/en/latest/guides/packaging_components.html#a-simple-esp-idf-component) structure.

#### Create the new project

To create the component, we will use a project as the starting point. This project will be used to test the component.

```bash
idf.py create-project example-shtc3
```

Now inside the project folder, let's test the build for the ESP32-C3.

> ```bash

Reviewer 2: If you are planning to show how to upload the component to the registry in the next one, then it's better to make the structure inside out. I.e. `shtc3` component > `examples` > `example-shtc3` 

And use the `override_path` in the example's manifest.

Author: I'll do it in the next one. I want to keep this as simple as possible.

```bash
idf.py menuconfig
```

Having a component with a clear documentation and at least one example, can make your component frustration free. Developers enjoy when it just works!

### Running the application

To run the application, run the command to `flash` and `monitor` using the `idf.py`. The application will print the temperature and humidity.

{{< asciinema
  key="component_shtc3"
  idleTimeLimit="2"
  speed="1.5"
  poster="npt:0:09"
>}}

## Conclusion

Writing a new component is highly recommended for improving the project architecture. This is a very powerful approach and can be used for many different types of component, not only for drivers.

In a future article, this component will be added to the [Component Registry](https://components.espressif.com/) to be easily shared across the community.

## Reference

- [ESP-Registry](https://components.espressif.com/)
- [ESP-Registry Documentation](https://docs.espressif.com/projects/idf-component-manager/en/latest/)
- [Compote Documentation](https://docs.espressif.com/projects/idf-component-manager/en/latest/reference/compote_cli.html)
- [Component Examples](https://github.com/espressif/esp-bsp/tree/master/components)

> - [My Components](https://github.com/pedrominatel/esp-components)

Reviewer 2: I would suggest this link: https://components.espressif.com/components?q=ns%3Apedrominatel

## Conceiving the component

Frequently, placing self-contained parts of code in a separate component not only helps to keep the application code cleaner, but also simplifies development and maintenance. To get started with the component development process, we need to understand the basic structure and how the component will interact with the application.

As covered in the article What is the ESP Component Registry, a component can be either created directly in the application or in a separated project and then added to the application.

{{< article link="/blog/2024/10/what-is-the-esp-registry/" >}}

When choosing whether to create a component in a separate project, consider if you plan to share the component with other applications. If yes, the best approach is to create the component in a new project that will contain just the component and examples if needed.

{{< alert >}}
This article will not cover how to publish the component in the ESP Component Registry. It will be covered in the next article of this series.
{{< /alert >}}

## Creating the component

> Before creating the component, we will need to create a new project that the component will be part of. If you have already the project, you can skip this step and jump to the component creation.

Author: It's better to remove it.

            int "I2C SDA pin"
            default 17
            range 0 55
            help
                Set the I2C SDA pin for the data signal.

        config SHTC3_I2C_SCL
            int "I2C SCL pin"
            default 18
            range 0 55
            help
                Set the I2C SCL pin for the clock signal.

        config SHTC3_I2C_CLK_SPEED_HZ
            int "I2C clock speed (Hz)"
            default 100000
            range 10000 400000
            help
                Set the I2C clock speed in Hz.
    endmenu
  
endmenu
```

The `Kconfig` file should be placed on the component root directory. To set the values, you can use the command:

```bash
idf.py menuconfig
```

To configure the I2C, go to the `Component config` -> `Driver SHTC3 Sensor` and set the `I2C SDA pin`, `I2C SCL pin`, and the `I2C clock speed (Hz)`.

## Running the application

To run the application, run the command to `flash` and `monitor` using the `idf.py`. The application will print the temperature and humidity.

```bash
idf.py flash monitor
```

### Console log output

{{< asciinema
  key="component_shtc3"
  idleTimeLimit="2"
  speed="1.5"
  poster="npt:0:09"
>}}

## Conclusion

> Creating a new component requires several steps and might be confusing. In this article, we guided you on the basic steps of creating the component, adding a new component to this project, adding the code to the component, and finally adding the configuration menu.
> 
> Writing a new component is highly recommended for improving the project architecture. This is a very powerful approach and can be used for many different types of component, not only for drivers.
> 

Reviewer: My previous comment was about mentioning some facts, like the sensor name. Now I think it is not needed. Still the conclusion can be slightly more refined like this:

```suggestion
In this article, we went through the basic steps of creating a component skeleton, adding it to a project, writing the code, testing it, and, finally, adding the configuration menu.

Even though creating a new component requires a few additional steps, it helps improve the project architecture and make code reusable. This is a very powerful approach not only for creating driver components, but any other code that can work in a modular fashion.
```
